patch(DPE-9692): Documentation for encryption at rest (#273)
canonical/mongo-single-kernel-library: docs/how-to/encryption-at-rest.md

> (encryption-at-rest)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Learn how to configure encryption at rest on Charmed MongoDB using Vault as a storage backend."
---

(encryption-at-rest)=
```

We are expected now to introduce HTML meta descriptions in our docs to improve SEO. (Just new pages for now; next cycle we will add them to the existing pages)

# How to configure encryption at rest

Data at rest encryption should be used when your data is highly valuable. It should be used with data in transit encryption (TLS), and adequate policies to protect accounts.

> It helpers organizations to comply with security and privacy standards like HIPAA, PCI-DSS, GDPR and FIPS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It helps organizations comply with security and privacy standards like HIPAA, PCI-DSS, GDPR and FIPS.
```

> Charmed MongoDB provides encryption at rest using Vault as a storage backend for the encryption keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Charmed MongoDB provides encryption at rest using Vault as a key management backend for the encryption keys.
```

```{caution}
This feature can only be enabled at deploy time. It requires a MongoDB instance that has never been started.
The charm will prevent you from enabling it after it has started.

> If you remove the vault integration and MongoDB restarts, it will be unable to decrypt the databases and start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**This feature can only be enabled at deploy time.** 

It requires a MongoDB instance that has never been started. The charm will prevent you from enabling it after it has started.

If you remove the Vault integration and MongoDB restarts, the charm will be unable to decrypt the databases and start.
```
(would I be correct to say that the _charm_ that will be unable to decrypt the dbs, or is it the _MongoDB service_?)

Author: It is MongoDB service that will fail.

```

## Pre-requisite

````{tab-set}
```{tab-item} VM
:sync: vm

You'll need:
* Charmed MongoDB - Revision 305 or higher
* (Optional) Charmed Mongos - Revision 118 or higher
```

```{tab-item} K8s
:sync: k8s

You'll need:
* Charmed MongoDB K8s - Revision 162 or higher
* (Optional) Charmed Mongos K8s - Revision 115 or higher
```
````

## A few words of caution

> Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If vault is unavailable for a too long period of time and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If Vault is unavailable for too long and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database.
```

> Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If vault is unavailable for a too long period of time and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database.

Reviewer 2: Can you add: so it is recommended that you have a scheduled backup policy in place

Author: Sure

> Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If vault is unavailable for a too long period of time and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database.

Author: ```suggestion
Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If vault is unavailable for a too long period of time and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database. It is recommended to have a scheduled backup policy set up for both Charmed MongoDB and Vault.
```

> This implementation provides some alerts if you are integrated with [COS Lite](https://charmhub.io/cos-lite). If vault fails, the charm will raise some critical statuses and start alerting. The tokens have a lifetime of one hour so after one hour of downtime, a restart of mongodb will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implementation provides some alerts if you are integrated with [COS Lite](https://charmhub.io/cos-lite). If Vault fails, the charm will raise critical statuses and start alerting. The tokens have a lifetime of one hour, so after one hour of downtime, a restart of MongoDB will fail.
```

Do not lose the credentials store in Vault, otherwise you will be left unable to decrypt the data.

> It is recommended to have regular backups of the Vault to ensure the key is not lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is highly recommended to make regular backups of the Vault to ensure the key is not lost. Without the credentials, you will be unable to decrypt the data.
```

## Deploy and configure Vault

Follow the [official Charmed Vault documentation](https://canonical-vault-charms.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/tutorial/)
until the vault is unsealed, authorised and you have removed the `one-time-token` secret.

> You don't need to create a key-value type secret, nor don't you want to destroy your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to create a key-value type secret, and you should not destroy your environment.
```

## Deploy MongoDB

> Deploy Charmed MongoDB for your substrate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy Charmed MongoDB for your substrate, specifying the `enable-encryption-at-rest` config option
```

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} VM
:sync: vm
```shell
juju deploy mongodb --channel=8/edge --config enable-encryption-at-rest=True
```
````

````{tab-item} K8s
:sync: k8s
```shell
juju deploy mongodb-k8s vault --channel=8/edge --trust --config enable-encryption-at-rest=True
```
````
`````

> After a few minutes it will stay in status `blocked/idle`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a few minutes it will stay in a `blocked/idle` status:
```

---

(encryption-at-rest)=

# How to configure encryption at rest

Data at rest encryption should be used when your data is highly valuable. It should be used with data in transit encryption (TLS), and adequate policies to protect accounts.
It helps organizations comply with security and privacy standards like HIPAA, PCI-DSS, GDPR and FIPS.

Charmed MongoDB provides encryption at rest using Vault as a key management backend for the encryption keys.

```{caution}
**This feature can only be enabled at deploy time.** 

It requires a MongoDB instance that has never been started. The charm will prevent you from enabling it after it has started.

If you remove the Vault integration and MongoDB restarts, the charm will be unable to decrypt the databases and start.
```

## Pre-requisite

````{tab-set}
```{tab-item} VM
:sync: vm

You'll need:
* Charmed MongoDB - Revision 305 or higher
* (Optional) Charmed Mongos - Revision 118 or higher
```

```{tab-item} K8s
:sync: k8s

You'll need:
* Charmed MongoDB K8s - Revision 162 or higher
* (Optional) Charmed Mongos K8s - Revision 115 or higher
```
````

## A few words of caution

> Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If Vault is unavailable for too long and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database.

Author: ```suggestion
Encryption at rest encrypts the data on disk. It relies on Vault to store the database encryption key. If Vault is unavailable for too long and MongoDB restarts, it will fail to start as it can't decrypt the database. It is recommended to have a scheduled backup policy working and regularly tested for both Charmed MongoDB and Vault.
```
